# Pong

I tried to start the first post at the beginning. Pong is the famous arcade
game developed and released in 1972 by Atari, at the time a brand new company.
However Pong wasn't really that original. Atari (probably) got the idea for
Pong from Tennis, an earlier game on the [Magnavox Odyssey][1]. Also Atari's
predecessor Syzygy had an unsuccesful run the year before with a space combat
arcade machine called [Computer Space][2]. Computer Space itself was based on a
much older computer game [Spacewar (1962)][3]. Video game history sort of took
a turn in 1972 rather than beginning there.

![Original Pong Cabinet](http://pongmuseum.com/history/_picts/atari/pong_cabbig-web.jpg){ width=50% }

Believe it or not the special thing about Pong was its gameplay. When players
went to try Computer Space they wouldn't know how to control the ship. If
they went so far as to read the instructions, then they would be rewarded with
a game that was difficult to control or required an understanding of
incomprehensible laws of physics to predict where the ship's shots would go.
Pong was by a large margin much more intuitive and attractive to arcade players.
The majority of Pong machines didn't even have instructions!

I want to look at two aspects of Pong. First, what is this game really? When
you see the game being played you quickly come to understand how it works.  But
it's an intuitive understanding. Is there a good way to define the game in
words? Or math? Secondly, *how does it really work*? How did they make this
game do its thing?

Maybe this is an exercise in coming up with the right questions to ask. So I'll
try to reformulate the last two questions in a better way.

- What is the game Pong?
- What is the implementation of Pong?

Right. "Pong" can refer to the machine itself or it can refer to something
else. Dr. Hugo Holden, whose [circuit analysis][7] I derived most of the
following info from, refers to a "ghost in the machine." That's kind of spooky
so... I will just call it "the game." What's the difference between the game
and the machine? This is the funny part: you probably know how the game works
already but not how the machine works. But the machine is a much easier affair
for me to describe precisely. 

I'll go over both "the game" and the machine, then try to figure out what
the relationship between the two are.

## How the game works

Pong is a real-time game for two players.

Both players scores start at zero and are displayed on the screen.

Each player has a control knob which determines the vertical position of an
on-screen bat. 

A ball bounces around the TV screen traveling in a straight line, reflecting
off the top or bottom of the screen, or off either players bat.

If the ball instead hits the left or right side of the screen, then the
opposite-side player gets a point.

After scoring and a short delay, the ball is re-served away from the player who
scored.

Bouncing off the side, off a bat, or scoring triggers one of three different
short sound effects.

As players successfully deflect the ball, the ball speed will gradually increase
until it reaches some maximum speed.

The ball speed is reset to minimum after a score or at the start of play.

Once either player reaches a score of 11 the game ends and the game returns to
"attract mode" which only responds to quarters and just shows the ball bouncing
around silently forever.

... also there is a dotted line down the center of the screen which represents
a net but it doesn't interact with anything.

## How the machine works

The machine consists of two potentiometers, a black-and-white TV monitor, a
coin slot, a speaker, and a crystal tuned to 14.3151 MHz to serve as a clock
all connected to a network of discrete digital logic integrated circuits (ICs).

Each wire in the network can be "on" or "off". Here's how the ICs are
connected and for what purpose.

[![Simplified Pong Block Diagram](img/pong-diagram.svg)](img/pong-diagram.svg)

The clock circuit is connected to an array of 4-bit ripple counters which
output 16 wires. The 16 wires can be understood as the bits of a number that
counts up at about 7 MHz and wraps around back to zero 60 times per second. The
first half of these bits represents the horizontal position of the TV scan
beam, the second half is the vertical position of the beam. This circuit also
outputs a signal that triggers when the count wraps around, which is fed to the
TV to get it to synchronize with the circuit's clock. This will keep the picture
from drifting. This circuit also outputs a signal indicating the horizontal
scan is wrapping around. This will be used in the detection of a missed ball.
The bits of this "video sync counter" circuit are used for a lot of things and
so are routed to many other places. They're really the central workhorse behind
the design.

Each player's potentiometer is connected to its own "bat data" circuit which
digitizes the pot position in the following way. Each circuit takes as input a
vertical reset signal to trigger a 555 timer to begin waiting. The wait
duration depends on the pot position. The lower the player wants the bat, the
longer the duration. When the time is up, the 555 timer will signal a counter
to begin counting horizontal resets. While it is counting up, it outputs a
signal called VPAD1 or VPAD2. When it gets to 15 (the height of the bat), this
signal stops. VPAD1 and VPAD2, when active, indicates that "vertical scanning
is within bat 1 or bat 2" respectively. These signals are fed to the "video
mixer and hit detector" circuit.

3 bits of the bat data counter from each of these circuits (6 total bits) are
fed to the "vertical velocity encoder". This circuit will determine what
happens to the balls vertical velocity when it gets hit with a bat. (This part
of the circuit is actually relevant to the game, since an understanding of the
vertical velocity encoder can help you make the ball bounce off in the
direction you want, at least if you're good.) The vertical velocity encoder
outputs 4 bits (the encoded vertical velocity) which is fed directly to the
"vertical ball position counter".

The "vertical ball position counter" is a counter that holds the vertical ball
position.  The counter is triggered by one of the bits from the video sync
circuit and the increment each time is determined by the 4 bits from the
vertical velocity encoder.  This circuit outputs 1 signal indicating whether
the vertical scan is currently overlapping the vertical position of the ball.
This "vertical scan overlaps ball" (VVID) signal is fed to the "video mixer and
hit detector" and also back to the vertical velocity encoder (for reversing the
velocity when it bounces off the top of bottom of the screen).

So far we only mentioned the vertical half of the machinery. That is enough
to implement bouncing off the top and bottom, but not enough to display a
ball or detect bat hits or misses. Onward to the horizontal components.

Like the vertical ball position counter there is a "horizontal ball position
counter" which outputs one signal (HVID) indicating that the horizontal video
scan overlaps the horizontal position of the ball. The rate of the counter is
determined by bits from video sync counter (these go pretty much everywhere)
and from something called the "left / right flip flop". HVID, like VVID, is
fed to the "video mixer and hit detector". But HVID is also used to detect a
missed ball by feeding into an AND gate with the horizontal blanking signal.
The output of this gate is called MISS.

The left / right flip flop outputs two bits which cause the ball to move left
move right or have no horizontal velocity. It is controlled by the "horizontal
speed control" counter, which counts bat hits.  As the ball is hit, this
counter increases to a maximum and [somehow causes the speed of the ball to
increase]. The left / right flip flop also takes as input the HIT signal, which
reverses the left / right motion. The HIT signal comes from the "video mixer
and hit detector".

The video mixer and hit detector takes HVID, VVID, and the two VPAD signals. It
also uses bits from the horizontal scan count to know if the beam is over the
horizontal position of bats. Also it takes the NET signal which indicates you
should show the center net. All of these are essentially ANDed together to get
one output "on" or "off" indicating black or white for the screen on the
current beam location. This circuit also outputs the HIT signal by ANDing the
BALL = HVID AND VVID with the two bat signals. So if the ball would be
displayed at the same time as a bat, thats a hit! The HIT signal is used to
reverse horizontal motion of the ball, increase the speed of the ball (see
"horizontal speed control"), and to start a hit sound effect.

With hits taken care of, what about MISS? As mentioned earlier the HVID
coinciding with a horizontal reset triggers MISS. MISS is fed to the "score
counters", the miss sound effect, and the serve delay system. The serve system
freezes the ball for a short time after a score.

The score counters take the MISS signal and the left / right flip flop to know
who to attribute the point to. The score counter outputs the score in the form
of two sets of 4 bits to two "seven segment encoders", and also a GAME STOP
signal which will trigger when either player reaches 11. GAME STOP is fed to
the coin slot circuit, which causes the game to enter "attract mode". The
ATTRACT line is fed to several places in the circuit to alter the behavior of
the game. For instance sound is muted and missing the ball acts like a bounce.
The score counter also has a reset input which is triggered when the game
begins.

The seven segment encoder takes a numeric score, encoded in 4 bits, several
bits of the video scan count, and outputs "on" or "off" indicating whether the
score display should show at this location. This final signal is ORed with the
output of the video-mixer-and-hit-detector circuit to get a final final
on-or-off for the TV signal.

The coin slot circuit reacts to an inserted coin by clearing the ATTRACT line
and signalling the score counters to reset. An inserted coin will also begin
a serve delay and set the left right flip flop to its initial state. This
circuit has some analog components, such as an antenna which is designed to
stop "cluey teenagers" from initializing the game with a radio frequency
signal without paying.

Finally there are three circuits for the hit, miss, and bounce sound effects.
Each of the three sound generators consists of a gate connected to one of the
video sync bits. The particular choice of video sync bit determines the audio
frequency since they are all flipping between on and off at different rates and
duty cycles. Normally the audio signals are blocked by the gates and can't be
heard. But any gate can be momentarily unlocked by the proper pulse (HIT, MISS,
or vertical blank coinciding with VVID). A slower signal from the video counter
restores the gates blocking behavior, causing the sounds to only blip
momentarily. Yes the sound is generated by the video.

In summary, the picture is produced by continually comparing the ball and bat
states with the current location of the TV's beam and outputing on or off.
Collision detection is accomplished by continually comparing the ball's
visibility with the horizontal / vertical blanking, or with the bat's
visibility. And response to collision events is just feedback from the
detectors back to the state circuits. Sound effects are bits from the video
counter blocked by a gate unless a pass-window is triggered by an event.

(The above descriptions are somewhat simplified. For example there are really a
dozen different blanking and reset signals happening in addition to the video
sync counters, but the distinction isn't important for this post.  Also
whenever I said AND gate, it's really a NAND gate. NAND gates are simpler
circuits than AND so many digital circuits do everything backwards by
convention. Also the horizontal speed control counter is being triggered by the
hit sound window instead of by HIT directly.)

## Analysis

What is the relationship between the game itself and the implementation given
here?

There are many implementations of the original Pong game. The one described
here was just the original implementation. You can play essentially the same
game on [pong-story.com][6]'s side panel. (Of course Dr. Holden will probably
disagree on this!) 

You can implement the same game different ways. This one is a very clever nest
of digital logic. The one on pong-story.com is probably very clever javascript.

The end user is probably not interested in the implementation, only the game.
The original customers were probably more enthralled by the game Pong rather
than the cleverness of the circuit. Likewise modern gamers are probably not
impressed by millions of lines of C++ code developed over the span of several
years.

The game description is much simpler than the original implementation. Simpler
descriptions are easier to understand and verify, right?

... How about make the implementation language the same as the language used
for describing the game itself?

Sounds ridiculous enough to save for the next post.

1. [Pongclarative](2016-07-02-pongclarative.html)

[1]: http://www.pong-story.com/odyssey.htm
[2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b3BQsCCwo8w
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spacewar_(video_game)
[4]: http://pongmuseum.com/history/_picts/atari/pong_cabbig-web.jpg
[5]: http://pongmuseum.com/faq/
[6]: http://www.pong-story.com/atpong1.htm
[7]: http://www.pong-story.com/LAWN_TENNIS.pdf
